Hi there.
This is Lou.
And welcome back.
I would say we are not done with part one of the concurrency chapter.
And in the remaining part of the chapter, we will mainly explore about threat cooperation and management.
These are a couple of concerns that we addressed so far.
To address race condition.
What we needed was a city that is a threat has to atomically perform some operations.
We saw that both synchronization and atomic variables help with that.
And with regards to memory visibility, in addition to synchronization and atomic variables, we could
use volatile variables.
And here are a couple of new requirements that are yet to be addressed.
First one is threat cooperation with synchronization.
We saw a form of threat cooperation.
That is when one threat is inside a synchronized region.
Then other threats have to wait and cannot enter either same or another synchronized region that is
guarded by the same lock.
So the cooperation helps with threats not interfering with each other.
However, in certain scenarios, we need more than this simple cooperation.
For instance, if one thread is inside synchronize region, it may not be able to perform its task unless
some other thread performs some other relevant task.
And for that, the first thread has to let the other thread take over and perform its task before the
first thread can continue.
Not that here.
Foster needs to know whether or not the other thread has performed the relevant task.
Right.
And this information is captured via some shared state.
And if the shared state meet certain criteria, which is nothing but a condition only, then the first
thread will continue its actions.
So there is also a condition involved that plays a part here.
Shortly we will look at an example of this.
So what we are going to see next is some real interaction between threats.
And for this, we will look at three approaches.
First one is something I would refer to as a naive approach, which would rely on volatile variables.
Second approach is wait notify approach, which uses methods called wait and notify for interacting.
And the last approach would involve some concurrency utilities which were introduced in Java five,
and they represent the best approach for threat cooperation.
And second equipment is about threat management, which is important when we are dealing with large
scale systems where we would have lots and lots of threats running concurrently.
In such scenarios, we need to have a good threat creation and management facility in place that is
creating threats.
The way we have seen so far will not be of much help.
From a practical standpoint, they are only good for small applications.
Concurrency utilities that come with Java file includes something called Executable Framework, which
would help with this.
Later, we will look at this executable framework and you will notice how easy it is to use that framework.
Not to understand that cooperation and management.
We will use Web page indexing process as our example.
Web page indexing is a process that is done by search engines like Google and Web page indexing is a
very complex process.
The first step would be to download Web pages, and this is done by a Web crawler.
We already discussed a little bit about Web Crawler, given a URL of a web page.
A Web crawler would first download that web page and would then recursively download all the web pages
that are referenced from that particular web page.
And this process continues with the downloaded web pages.
To that is the download of web pages will also have certain links, and we need to download all those
web pages.
Once the web pages are downloaded, they need to be indexed.
For this search engines build something called an inverted index, which is a data structure that allows
us to search those documents in a very efficient way.
So if you need fast text search, then inverted index is what you would be building.
The field of information retrieval is all about web crawling and indexing process.
It's a very interesting field.
So that the most that we will do will simulate this process.
And each demo incorporates a new feature which we will learn and would typically improvise on the previous
feature that was learned.
So it's going to be really cool and I hope you will like the approach taken here.
And this is what we would have in our demo programs.
We would have three classes Downloader, Indexer and web link.
An instance of web link represents a URL of a web page, and this web link object is shared between
downloader and indexer objects, which are nothing but two threads.
So for each weblink we are basically creating downloader and indexer threads and they share the same
web link.
Object Downloader thread is responsible for downloading the web page referenced by web link and indexer
thread is responsible for indexing the downloaded web page.
So there would be threat cooperation here as the indexer should be able to index only after the downloaded
thread can download the webpage.
That is, even if the indexer thread is ready to index and the downloader has not yet downloaded the
web page, then indexer needs to somehow wait until downloader completes downloading the web page.
So the condition here for indexer to proceed would be the availability of downloaded web page.
The demo programs will also involve more than one web link.
And for each web link we would create two threads.
So at any given point of time, we will have many threads working concurrently.
Now let's go ahead and do our first demo and we will look at the new approach that I mentioned earlier
for threat cooperation.
For this demo, I created a new sub package called comm dot semantics squared dot concurrency dot indexer.
So it's created under com dot semantics concurrency.
And within this sub package indexer, I created a new class called Naive Indexer.
So the entire code has been written.
So we are just going to look at this code and we are not going to write any new code in this class because
there is a lot of code here.
And in subsequent demos we will be writing some code.
So this class now indexer, it has three.
Nested classes.
One of them is Web link.
This is Web Link and the two other classes are indexer and downloader.
We already discussed that in the lecture.
So in the weblink class we have these fields ID, title, URL and host and also the HTML page, the
web page.
So that will be stored in this variable called HTML page.
And we are using a volatile variable here.
So it's a volatile modifier and we need that because we have two different threads which are trying
to interact with each other and they need to see the the value of this variable.
So this is a shared variable.
And other than that, we just have some getters and setters here and this is the Downloader class and
it implements Learnable.
So we said that both the downloader and the indexer.
They share the same web link object.
And so we have the constructor here where the web link is being initialized.
And here is the run method because we are implementing run double and similarly we have the indexer.
So just like downloader, it also has the constructor and web link object is being initialized here
and we also have the run method here.
And so those are the three classes and the new indexer class itself.
It has three methods go add and create web link and also the main method.
So in the main method we are instantiating now indexer and we are creating four web links here.
So the create web link method is mainly responsible for creating the web link and we are passing all
the values needed.
So we are passing four different links here, links to web pages and we are passing all the necessary
information.
And all these for web links will be stored here in order, will be stored in a data structure.
And for that we have created this add method.
So ADD method is here and the data structure that we are using is an array deck here.
So at the top we are creating an array deck and it will store items of type web link.
So and we are naming it as Q and they are all added into the queue using the ADD method.
Okay.
And finally, we are invoking the method.
Go here and here is the method go and the method go.
Basically iterates over the queue, which has the four lengths.
And in each iteration it is, it is extracting the web link, a web link by, by invoking the remote
method on the queue.
And it is creating two threads, the downloader thread and the indexer thread and it is passing, it
is passing the weblink and it is also instantiating both downloader and indexer.
So those are the tasks and those tasks are initialized with the common object web link.
Right.
And then we are starting the threads.
Now let's go ahead and look at these threads.
Okay.
So here is the run method and inside of download class.
And here basically we are downloading the web page.
So we are invoking the get URL method and we are downloading and for downloading.
So we have this utility class called HTTP, connect, download and that would actually download the
web page.
So this will also be provided in the resources section and you can take a look at it.
And so that we will get the HTML page here.
And the web link class has the has the HTML page variable also.
And the way we set it is by invoking the setter method for that.
So if we invoke it, so we'll have the setter method.
So that's what we are doing here.
And just note that all the three nested classes are static member classes.
So we are not using non static member classes because non static member classes will store a hidden
reference to the end closing class, which is the new indexer.
And we don't need that because we don't need to access any of its members, any of its member instance
members.
So we are going to save that and that's the reason why we are using static nested classes.
So that's it.
So we are going to set the HTML page here and in the indexer we have the run method.
Now both the threads have to communicate, right, because the indexer thread should not index the document
before the download happens.
It needs the downloaded web page in order to index the document.
And for index we just use this method called index.
It's defined within the indexer class and all it does is it takes the text and it simply says that that
particular text has been indexed.
So it's just printing the ID.
So we're not going we are not doing anything, anything special over here with regards to indexing.
So here so this thread, basically the way it is working is so it is downloading the HTML page, but
if the HTML page is not equal to null only then we are indexing it.
But if it is equal to null, then we should not index then this particular thread.
The index thread has to wait for the downloader thread to complete downloading the web page.
Right.
And for that reason we have this infinite loop here.
So if if the HTML page is equal to null, then we go into the loop and we just say that the web page
is not yet downloaded.
So among the two threads, the indexer thread is started first and it is running first.
It is in the running state, so it is in the running state before the downloader downloader thread and
hence we are getting into this loop and HTML page is equal to null.
And so we are going into this else condition here and then we are iterating it until the thread scheduler
what schedule the other thread, the downloader thread and whenever the other thread downloads a web
page, then in one of the iterations the HTML page would be equal to not null but would be not null.
And in that case, we index the page and we break out of the loop.
So that's it.
And let me just go ahead and run this.
So you can see it is not yet downloaded.
Not yet downloaded.
So it's just working forever.
Okay.
Now it is done.
So here.
The ID, the document, the webpage with ID 2000 has been indexed and it is once again printing 2002
not yet downloaded.
And then once it was downloaded, then we are indexing it.
The indexed thread is indexing it.
And the other threads might have been indexed at the top.
Definitely.
So we cannot view them here.
So that's how it is working.
So that's how we are cooperating.
The threads are cooperating.
So it is the second thread.
Indexer thread is waiting using a while loop here in finite loop.
And here I have some, some some little bit of notes here.
So here HTML page is declared as volatile in web link.
And if there are any web links, this approach is creating twice the number of threads.
Right?
Because for each web link we are creating two threads.
But the limitation here is that the CPU cycles are wasted and indexer as it is waiting for the page
to be downloaded.
Right.
So as it is waiting, we have this infinite loop going on.
So that would base the CPU cycles.
And that's the reason why we call it as a naive indexer.
And this is what we will try to improve, improve on with the subsequent demos.
And the next demo is about using the wait and notify approach, which actually improves on this approach.
And we will see that.
So that's about it.
And this code is available and the resources section and thank you.
I'll see you in the next lecture.